Sqlite in cloud documentation (#740)
fermyon/developer: content/cloud/sqlite-storage.md

- [Accessing Private Beta](#accessing-private-beta)
- [Limitations For SQLite In Fermyon Cloud](#limitations-for-sqlite-in-fermyon-cloud)
- [How To](#how-to)
- [Create a Table In Your SQLite Database](#create-a-table-in-your-sqlite-database)
- [Manage The SQLite Database Lifecycle](#managed-sqlite-database-lifecycle)
- [Next Steps](#next-steps)

With SQLite support in Fermyon Cloud, you can persist relational data generated by your Spin application in between application invocations without having to worry about database management. Fermyon Cloud will provision and manage the database on your behalf. To learn more about the Spin SQLite SDK, please visit the [API guide](../spin/sqlite-api-guide.md).

## Accessing Private Beta

SQLite Storage in Cloud is currently in private beta. To request access to the private beta, please fill out this short [sign-up form](https://fibsu0jcu2g.typeform.com/to/Brv12FI0#hubspot_utk=xxxxx&hubspot_page_name=xxxxx&hubspot_page_url=xxxxx).
 
> Please note that the private beta is limited in space and all requests cannot be guaranteed. 

## Service Limitations and Quotas For SQLite in Fermyon Cloud

*Service Limitations*

> * There is a 1:1 relationship between Spin application and SQLite Store

Author: Reworked this section! Starts with quotas and then graduates into Service Limitations

* You must delete your Spin application before you can delete your SQLite Store
* The `--sqlite` flag not supported on `spin cloud deploy`
* Fermyon Cloud doesn't support "custom" SQLite Stores

*Quotas* 
* You can have a maximum of 1 "default" SQLite Store 
* Your SQLite Store can hold up 1 GB of data

## How To:

### Prepare a SQLite Database

> Since `--sqlite` is not supported on `spin cloud deploy`, we recommend using the `execute` command in your application's source code to create a table. For example, in this routing function we use the Rust SDK to check if the table exists. If it doesn't, then we create one:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since `--sqlite` is not supported on `spin cloud deploy`, we recommend using the `execute` command in your application's source code to create a table. For example, in this function we use the Rust SDK to check if the table exists, and to create it if not:
```

(suggested removing 'routing' because the routing bit is irrelevant to what we want to show, and reworded to end to more closely entwine the check and create, otherwise the reader will go "but what about time-of-check-to-time-of-use")

Author: Good point. Removed

> Since `--sqlite` is not supported on `spin cloud deploy`, we recommend using the `execute` command in your application's source code to create a table. For example, in this routing function we use the Rust SDK to check if the table exists. If it doesn't, then we create one:

Author: @rylev's been working on an import command using with `spin cloud sqlite` but it will only work at application runtime (not during deployment). I think there's a way we adjust the wording though to make it a bit less abrasive to the user.

```rust
#[http_component]
fn handle_todo(req: Request) -> anyhow::Result<Response> {
    let connection = Connection::open_default()?;

> 		connection.execute("CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS todos (

Reviewer: Indentation is too indented

Author: Fixed

			  id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT,
			  description TEXT NOT NULL,
			  due_date DATE,
			  starred BOOLEAN DEFAULT 0,
			  is_completed BOOLEAN DEFAULT 0
				);", &[])?;

    let router = http_router! {
<...>
    };
    router.handle(req)
}
```

### Manage SQLite Database Lifecycle

> A SQLite Store is created when you deploy a Spin application that references a "default" SQLite database in it's component manifest. Multiple components in the same Spin application can be given access to the default database like so:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A SQLite Store is created when you deploy a Spin application that references a "default" SQLite database in its component manifest. Multiple components in the same Spin application can be given access to the default database like so:
```

```toml
# c1 does not have access to the default database
[component]
name = "c1"

# c2 can use the default database
[component]
name = "c2"
sqlite_databases = ["default"]

# c3 can use default database as well
[component]
name = "c3"
sqlite_databases = ["default"]
```

The SQLite database will created when the Spin application is deployed. The data in between Spin application invocations and updates. 

```bash
$ spin cloud deploy
Deploying app ..
Creating database inspirational-pig (default) for app "quickstart"
```

You can check to see which Spin application is tied to your SQLite Store by using the `spin cloud sql` command:

```bash

> $ spin cloud sql list

Author: Yes, updated to be `sqlite` 👍

> inspirational-pig (default) (currenly used by "quickstart")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
inspirational-pig (default) (currently used by "quickstart")
```

Author: Fixed

```

> Lastly, after [deleting your Spin application](/delete.md) you can delete your default database with the following command:

Reviewer 2: It is 3. And the answer imo is that its a private preview feature and we'd like 1 to be available. I'm reluctant to add automatic database deletion to just remove that flow in a couple weeks. @rylev do you see us being able to add 1 in a couple weeks after private preview? Then we could just update the cloud plugin

> Lastly, after [deleting your Spin application](/delete.md) you can delete your default database with the following command:

Reviewer: Nah, that makes sense.  We maybe just want some wording a la

> In the Private Beta, the database is inaccessible once the application has been deleted. However, we separate out the the database deletion step because we anticipate the database being accessible after deletion in a future beta.

?

> Lastly, after [deleting your Spin application](/delete.md) you can delete your default database with the following command:

Author: I added this to the callout below (where we say we enforce DB deletion to prevent unintentional data sharing between spin apps). Hopefully that clarifies things.

```bash

> $ spin cloud sql delete default

Reviewer 2: Yes, it is a preparing for the future thing :). Since databases are tied to accounts not apps, we want them all to have a unique name (not just default).

> $ spin cloud sql delete default

Reviewer: So should this command be `spin cloud sqlite delete inspirational-pig`?

> $ spin cloud sql delete default

Author: Updated!

inspirational-pig has been deleted
```

> > The SQLite Store must be deleted before another Spin application can use the feature to prevent unintentional data sharing between Spin applications. 

Reviewer: I kind of get the reason for this but it's going to be a source of error for people who delete their app in the UI and then have to remember to go back to the command line and delete the database.  (Especially if the database is inaccessible - out of sight, out of mind.)

Could the UI offer to delete the database when the user deletes the owning app?

Or am I misunderstanding the lifecycle and a later app can regain access to the database?

Author: Yes, having Fermyon Cloud Dashboard offer to also delete the database after application deletion is a great fast-follow up item for us post launch. I see your point that even after the Spin app is deleted and the DB persists, the user is still stuck since they can't redeploy the app to access the data again

title = "NoOps SQL Database"
template = "cloud_main"
date = "2023-07-26T16:00:00Z"
enable_shortcodes = false
[extra]
url = "https://github.com/fermyon/developer/blob/main/content/cloud/noops-sql-database.md"

---

- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
- [Accessing Private Beta](#accessing-private-beta)
- [Limitations For NoOps SQL Database In Fermyon Cloud](#limitations-for-noops-sql-database-in-fermyon-cloud)
- [How To](#how-to)
- [Create a Table In Your NoOps SQL Database](#create-a-table-in-your-noops-sql-database)
- [Manage The NoOps SQL Database Lifecycle](#manage-the-noops-sql-database-lifecycle)
- [Next Steps](#next-steps)

> With NoOps SQL Database using SQLite support in Fermyon Cloud, you can persist relational data generated by your Spin application in between application invocations without having to worry about database management. Fermyon Cloud will provision and manage the database on your behalf. To learn more about the Spin SQLite SDK, please visit the [API guide](../spin/sqlite-api-guide.md).

Reviewer 2: Can we off the bat explain what "NoOps" means?

## Accessing Private Beta

NoOps SQL Database in Fermyon Cloud is currently in private beta. To request access to the private beta, please fill out this short [sign-up form](https://fibsu0jcu2g.typeform.com/to/Brv12FI0#hubspot_utk=xxxxx&hubspot_page_name=xxxxx&hubspot_page_url=xxxxx).
 
> Please note that the private beta is limited in space and all requests cannot be guaranteed. 

## Service Limitations and Quotas For NoOps SQL Database in Fermyon Cloud

*Service Limitations*

> * You must delete your Spin application before you can delete your NoOps SQL Database

Reviewer 2: Sorry this is being nitty but why are we retaining "NoOps" adjective the whole time?

Author: No apologies needed! Nitty is good. 

We're retaining the adjective b/c its part of the feature name. We really want to drive home the point that NoOps is needed for this feature. I hear you though, its a long time which makes one start to crave TLAs again :-P

Reviewer: @macolso I hear you get CEO brownie points if you call it "Noopsicle"

			  id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT,
			  description TEXT NOT NULL,
			  due_date DATE,
			  starred BOOLEAN DEFAULT 0,
			  is_completed BOOLEAN DEFAULT 0
				);", &[])?;

    let router = http_router! {
<...>
    };
    router.handle(req)
}
```

### Manage SQLite Database Lifecycle

A SQLite Store is created when you deploy a Spin application that references a "default" SQLite database in it's component manifest. Multiple components in the same Spin application can be given access to the default database like so:

```toml
# c1 does not have access to the default database
[component]
name = "c1"

# c2 can use the default database
[component]
name = "c2"
sqlite_databases = ["default"]

# c3 can use default database as well
[component]
name = "c3"
sqlite_databases = ["default"]
```

The SQLite database will created when the Spin application is deployed. The data in between Spin application invocations and updates. 

```bash
$ spin cloud deploy
Deploying app ..
Creating database inspirational-pig (default) for app "quickstart"
```

You can check to see which Spin application is tied to your SQLite Store by using the `spin cloud sql` command:

```bash
$ spin cloud sqlite list

> inspirational-pig (default) (currenly used by "quickstart")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
inspirational-pig (default)
```

> title = "Use SQLite Storage In Cloud"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title = "SQLite Storage"
```

template = "cloud_main"
date = "2023-07-26T16:00:00Z"
enable_shortcodes = false
[extra]
url = "https://github.com/fermyon/developer/blob/main/content/cloud/sqlite-storage.md"

---

- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
- [Next Steps](#next-steps)

## Prerequisites 

> * SQLite Stoage in Cloud is currently in private beta. To request access to the private beta, please fill out this short [sign-up form](https://fibsu0jcu2g.typeform.com/to/Brv12FI0#hubspot_utk=xxxxx&hubspot_page_name=xxxxx&hubspot_page_url=xxxxx). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* SQLite Storage in Cloud is currently in private beta. To request access to the private beta, please fill out this short [sign-up form](https://fibsu0jcu2g.typeform.com/to/Brv12FI0#hubspot_utk=xxxxx&hubspot_page_name=xxxxx&hubspot_page_url=xxxxx). 
```

> >> Please note that the private beta is limited in space and all requests cannot be guarenteed. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>> Please note that the private beta is limited in space and all requests cannot be guaranteed. 
```
